Repairs You Can Do and How-To Guides
If you've made it this far you're no doubt ready to dive in and tackle your next repair. How do we know you're ready? Because you're determined, and because you were smart enough to come to About.com to find out more! The list of common repairs you'll find in this section will save you time, money and frustration dealing with your mechanic. Sometimes you have to bite the bullet and let a professional take care of things. The rest of the time, it's all about you, your tools and the feeling of empowerment when you look at a job well done.
How To Replace Your Oxygen Sensor
Is your Check Engine Light haunting you from the dash like a tiny, orange, burning ember? If it is, there's a fairly good chance that a bad O2 sensor is causing the problem. These sensors go bad all the time. Some experts say that new fuels with higher ethanol content are causing parts of our cars, including the O2 sensors, to go bad prematurely. Whether this is the case or not, if your CEL (Check Engine Light) is on you won't be on the road much longer thanks to most states' inspection programs.
Of course before you go replacing an O2 sensor you'll want to be sure that's the problem. Even the parts are expensive, not to mention the labor if you're paying a shop to do the work for you. A Check Engine Light can mean a lot of things, and even though the oxygen sensor is often the culprit, there are hundreds of other possibilities.
How do you know if your car or truck needs a new O2 sensor? 
The answer to this question is simple. Your Check Engine Light is on because the computer is "throwing a code." In tech speak this means that the computer has detected a malfunctioning system, and has produced an error message which caused the Check Engine Light to come on. With a code reader, you can read this error, called an OBD Code, and determine if the O2 sensor is the culprit. If you don't have a code reader, there's a free and easy way to retrieve that error message. Learn how.
The question of whether or not you can replace your own O2 sensor will probably be answered by figuring out what type your car or truck has. There are two types of sensor, a screw-in type and a weld-in type. Needless to say there are a lot of differences in what goes into the installation of these two types of sensors. Save yourself some time and energy by figuring it out ahead of time. 
The best way to determine what type of O2 sensor you have is to consult your repair manual, or simply ask the clerk at the auto parts store. They can look up your car by make and model and tell you in less than 5 minutes whether you are on the road to a DIY job, or headed to the repair shop. If you are blessed with the screw-in type, read on and you can replace your own. You'll save major bucks. If you are cursed with a weld-in type sensor (unless you're a welder) you probably need to head to the repair shop for this job. Don't try to install a weld-in O2 sensor with something like epoxy -- it won't stand up to the task.
Now that you have determined that you have a screw-in type O2 sensor and you think you can tackle the task of installing it yourself, let's get to it. The good news is once you get to it, the job isn't super tough. Start by spraying the sensor with a good penetrant to loosen it up a bit. The constant heating and cooling of that area can make any bolt tough to remove. If you want to do this job more safely and easily, I recommend buying a proper oxygen sensor wrench. This will ensure an easy removal of the old sensor without damaging any of the delicate wires hanging out of it. 
If your O2 sensor is being stubborn, you may have to apply the added force of a breaker bar to get it out of there. This is not uncommon, so don't be afraid to add some leverage to the equation.
With your old sensor out, you are ready to get the new one in. Start the installation by hand so you can be sure you don't crossthread the expensive new sensor. That would suck. Using the same wrench you used to safely remove the old oxygen sensor, install the new one tightly. You can now reconnect the wiring to the sensor. Once you've done that, the job is done!
*If your Check Engine Light was on before this repair, it may go out by itself when your car's computer starts analyzing the new data. If it doesn't you can try disconnecting the battery overnight for reset, or take it to a shop and ask them to reset the light for you.
How To Replace Spark Plug Wires
Spark plug wires are one of the more neglected parts of most engines. It's not that they don't go bad, but most people don't replace their plug wires until one of them is so bad it's causing their engine to run badly. Did you know that one of the major causes of Check Engine Lights is a bad plug wire? A faulty spark plug wire can cause an engine misfire, which will trigger the light and cost you a trip to the repair shop to turn it off. I recommend new spark plug wires every 30,000 miles or so. They can last much longer, but when they go bad you'll spend much more time and money on the repair than you would have on the prevention.
The point is this: Spark plug wires are easy insurance against a breakdown. Take the time to replace them and you'll be doing yourself a favor. Do the job while you install new spark plugs and you're really saving time.
This may seem like a superfluous step in the process, but it's major. if you're working on a 4-cylinder engine, a straight 6, and most V8 engines, your job is probably very easy. Now's the time to take a look at your engine to see if you can easily reach all of the spark plug wires. Remove the "fashion cover" that hides all of the engine components, and see if you can see all of the plug wires and access holes. If you can, you can skip to this simple step and celebrate. Your job is easy. If you can't easily reach all of your plug wires, your afternoon just got longer. In many modern engines half of the spark plugs are way out of reach, and replacement requires removal of one or more engine components. The following how-to steps will guide you through a typical replacement that involves difficulties such as this. Take it slow, and take notes -- you shouldn't have any problems!
If you've made it this far, you have an engine that makes it very difficult to change your plugs and wires. Don't sweat it. Your day may be longer, but take it step by step and you won't have any problems.
The first step is to remove the air box. The air box contains your air filter, and connects to the large intake plenum that you can see is hiding the rest of your spark plug wires. If you have a large flexible hose connecting the air box to the plenum, you can remove the clamps that hold the hose on each end, and remove the hose, leaving the air box in place. If your air box and hose are one unit, you'll have to unbolt the entire box. Before removing the hose or the box, check to see what electrical connections you may need to disconnect first.* *If you want to be sure you properly reconnect your electrical plugs, take a digital photo of the air box setup before you remove anything, or draw a diagram to aid your memory.
Before you can remove the intake plenum, there are a number of electrical connections, cables, nuts, bolts and who knows what else for you to deal with. Take your time. Start with all of the electrical plugs. A digital photo may help you remember where all of these connections are. You'll also need to disconnect the accelerator cable from the throttle body on the back of the intake plenum (if your car is equipped with a cable). Now you need to remove all of the nuts and bolts holding the intake onto the head, and there will be lots. Brackets, studs, and threaded holes all hold this thing on. Take your time and visually move over every inch of the intake before you start to pull and tug. It may take a little force to remove, but be sure you've reached that point before you start to go for it. Sometimes the gaskets can act a little like glue, holding things together tightly. If you think this is the case, a few taps with a soft mallet can help get things moving.
With all of the junk removed, you can finally see those spark plug wires sticking out of the back of the engine! WAIT! Don't start yanking them out just yet. You need to replace the plug wires one at a time to ensure you don't mix up any of the connections. Replacing them one at a time insures they will be reinstalled in the correct location. Also, I find that it helps to lay all of the new spark plug wires out on a clean table so that you can best match up the old wire with the new one according to length.
And hey, while you have the wires off, it's a great time to replace the spark plugs! You didn't do all of that work just to have to do it again the next time you need a tune up.
How To Replace a Rear Brake, Turn Signal or Back Up Light Bulb
Every bulb on the outside of your car has a safety function. This may seem obvious, but think about how often you see somebody driving around with a tail light out, or with only one brake light. The fact is these little bulbs are often neglected. Many people don't replace them until they get pulled over and have to try to avoid the fine. It only takes a second to inspect all of your bulbs (check out our back up light trick for testing those guys.)
Don't be a slacker. Take 5 minutes and do a walkaround. Even if you find a dead bulb, we can help you replace it in no time. The last thing you want is a ticket or an accident.
The bulbs for all of your red, white and yellow lights are hidden behind a colored lens. In most cars and trucks they're all in one place but some vehicles used a few separate lens assemblies. Either way the same process applies.
First you need to remove the lens housing from the car. It's usually held in place with a few Phillips-head screws. Be sure to put them someplace safe. Now's not the time to lose a screw.
Now that you have the screws out and safely stowed you can pull the entire bulb assembly, or housing, out of its hole. You won't be able to pull it out too far because of all the wiring holding it in, but you don't need much space. Just don't pull hard on the wiring. Most assemblies will pull out as a whole, but some have a removable outer cover. These are even easier so if you have one you should count your tiny blessings.
The bulbs in your brake light or tail light assembly are held in place using a plug that holds the bulb, that also screws into the light assembly. Follow the wires to the back of the light that you need to replace, that's the bulb holder you want to unscrew. It doesn't actually screw, it only takes a quarter turn or so to unseat it and pull it out.
Finally! You can see the light (or lack thereof) at the end of the tunnel, a dead bulb. Your bulb either pulls straight out (most do these days) or requires a quarter turn twist like the bulb holder did. Remove the bad bulb and put the new one in. Now you're legal, and safe.
Without a fuel pump, your engine will quickly starve. A bad fuel pump will kill things quickly. You can easily replace and install an electric fuel pump. This how to will guide you through the process step by step.
Level of Difficulty: Moderate
What You'll Need:
Fire Extinguisher!
Replacement Fuel Pump
New Fuel Line
Open End Wrench Set
Socket Set
Flat Head Screwdriver
Phillips Head Screwdriver
Large Fuel Catch Container
When you're ready to replace your fuel pump, be sure you have safety in mind. Work in an open, well ventilated area, and be sure you have a fire extinguisher close by.
An electric fuel pump produces high fuel pressure to supply your electronic fuel injection system with plenty of pressurized fuel. The pressure doesn't go away just because you turn the engine off. You'll need to take steps to release the fuel pressure before you can remove the fuel pump or any associated parts.
Here are instructions on how to release your fuel pressure in one simple step. When you're sure there is no fuel pressure in the fuel lines or fuel pump, you can proceed with the fuel pump removal.
There are two types of electric fuel pump. One type mounts inside the gas tank, the other mounts underneath the car just in front of the fuel tank. If your fuel pump mounts underneath the car, it will be held in by a couple of bolts. You can locate your fuel pump by sliding underneath the car (if you can't fit, you can place the car securely on jack stands) and looking just in front of the gas tank on one side of the car or the other. You can also follow the fuel line from the tank to the fuel pump. The pump will often be in a black insulating sleeve. Unbolt it and let it drop down slightly. You won't be able to remove it from the sleeve until everything is disconnected.
If you have the type of fuel pump that mounts inside the fuel tank, you'll need to remove it from inside the car. The access point to an in-tank fuel pump is either underneath your back seat, or if you're lucky it's under carpet and an access panel in the trunk.
When you've located the pump, you'll need to disconnect everything before you remove it from the tank. This is covered in the following steps.Now that you can clearly see everything, you need to disconnect the fuel lines. If you have an in-tank pump, there will be one line on the top of the pump that needs to be disconnected. If you have an under car pump there will be both a line in and a line out. These are also called the low pressure and high pressure side of the pump.
To remove the lines, loosen the hose clamp or fitting that are holding the low pressure side in, then loosen the fitting and remove the line.
Be sure to have something on hand to catch the gas that leaks from the lines so that it doesn't splash the floor and create a fire hazard.The last step in removing your fuel pump is disconnecting the wires that power the pump. There will be two wires, one is positive, the other ground. It's a good idea to make a note of which is which. What seems obvious while you're taking it off can be baffling when it's time to put it all back. The wires will be held on by plugs, screws, or really small bolts.
With everything disconnected, you're ready to remove the pump. As the saying goes, installation is the reverse of removal, so go ahead!If you're driving around with a big hole in your car's plastic bumper, you need to stop. There's no reason to disgrace your beloved car or truck by subjecting it to ridicule due to the gaping tear in its otherwise beautifully painted plastic bumper cover. Seriously though, even a minor accident can result in a damaged bumper. Sometimes you're lucky and you can get away with simply sanding and painting the damaged area. But an impact as low speed as 15 mph is more than enough to tear a big gash into your bumper cover, resulting in unsightly damage that you don't have to live with.
The professionals use expensive epoxies, heat, plastic welding and other techniques to repair these bumpers. Not to mention the cost of a professional repaint. If you want it to be perfect, you should take it to a professional and let them repair, or often replace, your bumper cover. But if you aren't obsessed with perfection, or the value of your vehicle doesn't support spending that much money on the repair, the steps we took on this car might appeal to you. We were able to repair this car's bumper -- including a custom mixed paint for a perfect color match -- for less than $100. That's real savings. If you've just got a chip in the paint, check out this easy repair.The first step in repairing a plastic bumper is to clean the wound, so to speak. Chances are your damage was not a simple cut. Before you patch it, you need to cut off any bits that are sticking out. Anything that's breaking the natural contour of the bumper needs to be cut off. It may seem counterproductive to make your hole even bigger before you patch it, but those pieces sticking out will prevent you from creating a smooth surface with the patch. Large pieces can be cut off with a razor blade. Any small burrs or sections can be sanded down with 80-100 grit sandpaper.
Next, clean the back of the bumper as good as you can. If you can access the area behind the damage, that's perfect. Clean it well, and scuff it with your sandpaper. If you can't access it directly, do anything you can to clean the backside of the bumper near the damage.In order to create as lasting a repair as possible, you need to reinforce the area behind the holes before you add any filler to the front. To do this, cut a piece of auto repair cloth or mesh that is sized about an inch larger than your hole on all sides. Soak the cloth with fiberglass impregnated body filler and press it onto the back side of your damage holes. Allow at least 3 hours for the repair patch to set before proceeding to the next step.Once the patch has set, you can start to add filler to the front. I recommend a fiberglass-reinforced filler (the green Bondo) for strength. Add thin layers allowing them to dry between applications. See the section on filler for more info. When you're finished, sand the are smooth.Now that you've filled, sanded, and loved your bumper, it's time to spray the color on. We recommend ordering your paint as a custom mix. This produces much better results generally than the over the counter paint. It comes in an aerosol can and is easy to use, but the color actually matches! We found lots of them, but one guy you can find easily on Amazon.com seemed like the best, and we got a perfect match to a paint color that is not even available as an over-the-counter touch up paint!
Carefully mask the area around your repair and spray the smooth repair. Remember, many light coats are better than ewer heavy coats!
If your car uses a clearcoat type of paint, add layers of clearcoat once you're happy with your paint job.
In the beginning, gas powered vehicles used a carburetor to get gas into the engine. This worked well, but when fuel injection came along, things changed quickly. Fuel injection, especially electronic fuel injection produces fewer emissions and greatly increases gas mileage.
The carburetor was an ingenious invention in itself. Your car's engine has 4 cycles, and one of them is a "suck" cycle. Put simply, the engine sucks (creates extreme vacuum inside the cylinder) and when it does, the carburetor was there to let the right amount of gas and air get sucked into the engine. While great, this system lacked the precision of a pressurized injection system.
Enter fuel injection. Your engine still sucks, but instead of relying on the suck, fuel injection shoots exactly the right amount of fuel into the chamber. Fuel injection systems have gone through a few evolutions, adding electronics was a big step, but the idea has remained the same: an electrically activated valve (the injector) spraying a metered amount of fuel into your engine. Single port fuel injection systems spray gas into a central intake, that then sucks the gas and air into the engine all at once. This was sort of an in-between invention that combined a carburetor and fuel injection. Most European and Japanese cars skipped this step and went directly to multi-port fuel injection, while American makes used it.Multi-port injection is still widely in use today. So far it's the most efficient method of metering gas into the engine. Multi-port fuel injection, also known as MFI, consists of an injector for each cylinder in the engine. This injector sprays fuel directly through the intake valve or valves into the combustion chamber. Each injector is activated separately by wire. Early versions of this system, such as CIS, Jetronic and Motronic utilized a fuel distributor that metered fuel to the injectors through separate fuel lines. Later versions utilize a single fuel line that connects to a fuel rail on top of the engine. The injectors take gas from the central fuel rail and squirt it into the engine when told to do so. With diesel engines making a comeback, there has been more focus in recent years on diesel efficiency. Direct injection diesel engines utilize an injector that sprays fuel directly past the glow plug into the combustion chamber. The technology developed here allows for more complete burning of the diesel fuel, and thus better efficiency and less stinky smoke discharged into the atmosphere.How do fuel injection systems know how much gas to squirt anyway? Somewhere along the line, somebody (probably at Bosch) realized that you could measure how much gas your engine needed by how much air it was sucking in. Once your engine starts, the measuring of air begins. Early fuel injection systems used a vane system, which was basically a flap inside a tube, to measure how much air was being sucked.
Later systems use a "hot wire" to figure it out. When you turn your engine on, the wire becomes red hot. As air is sucked past this wire, it gets a little cooler. The car's brain measures exactly how much cooler it's getting and uses this number to figure out how much air it's sucking. Then it squirts the correct amount of fuel into the engine.
There are lots and lots of variations to fuel injection systems. We've got electrnic fuel injection, mechanical fuel injection, systems with one oxygen sensor, systems with four oxygen sensors ... but the basics remain the same.
Your brakes are probably the most important part of your car. Without an intake system, you'll just sit there. But at least you won't hit a tree while you're just sitting there! Seriously, brakes aren't something to play around with. If your car is having a braking problem, whether it's weak brakes, a mushy pedal, grinding sounds - whatever your brake problem is, you need to troubleshoot and repair it as soon as possible. We'll help you diagnose your braking problem so you know what repairs to make.
Brake Pedal Goes Too Far Down to Stop. If you step on the brake pedal and it feels like it's going too far down before you start to slow, you might have the following problems:
Low Brake Fluid Level: Check your brake fluid. If it's low, top it off to the mark on the side of the reservoir.
Contaminated Brake Fluid: Even though your brakes operate in a closed system, contaminants can still work there way into the works. Air can enter the system through the smallest hole, and you can end up with water in the system from condensation and other means. There's not really any way to check for this, but bleeding your brakes will remove the bad stuff and replace it with new fluid.
Worn Brake Pads: Your brakes should never wear low enough to cause your brake pedal to feel low, they'll scream at you before then. But if they do get very low, you might have this problem. Replace your brake pads as soon as possible. Of course, this can be avoided with regular brake inspection.
Bad Brake Power Boost Unit: Finally, if your brake booster goes bad you'll have low brake pedal issues. Most brake boosters are vacuum controlled, so a special vacuum measurement device that connects to the brake booster is needed to check it. If it's bad, you'll have to replace the boost unit.
Never change your oil while the engine is hot! Let it cool for a few hours, oil can burn you badly.
Be sure you have a safe area to do your oil change. Level, solid ground is a must so that you can safely jack up your car. I also like to put something on the driveway or garage floor underneath the engine in case you spill. Cardboard or a piece of plywood are great for this.
Before you even start to do your oil change, be sure you have everything you need to get the job done.
Caution! If you drove your car recently, your oil could be very hot. Allow at least two hours for your oil to cool before you start your oil change. Oil burns are very dangerous.
What You'll Need
Ratchet or open end wrench
Oil filter wrench
Oil catch/recycle container
Funnel
New oil filter
New Oil
Clean rag
The first step in an oil change is to get the old stuff out of there. The oil drains out of the oil pan at the very bottom of your engine. The oil is held in by a drain plug that looks like a big bolt at the bottom of the pan.
Warning! When your engine is warmed up, your engine oil can be as hot as 250 degrees! It's crucial that you allow at least two hours before you drain your oil to avoid a very serious burn.
Before you remove the oil drain plug, be sure that your recycling container is positioned underneath the oil drain. An oil change can be no fun if most of your time is spent cleaning up oil.
When you remove the drain plug, let it drop into the top of the recycling container. There's a screen on top that will keep it from dropping into the muck.
Let all of the oil drain out, then replace the drain plug, tightening it to your cars torque specifications (or "snug but not too hard" if you are sans torque wrench.)
Put the cap on the oil recycling container so you can drop it off at a location that accepts used oil -- most full service gas stations accept it.Next you need to remove your old oil filter. Using an oil filter wrench, turn the filter counterclockwise until it's free. Be careful with it, it's still full of old oil that can spill and make a mess.
Some oil filters can be reached from the top, but for most you'll have to be under the car.With the old oil out and the old filter out of the way, it's time to put the change in oil change. But before you install the new oil filter, you have to prep it.
Before you screw the new oil filter into place, lubricate the rubber gasket on the end of the filter with some new oil.
Next, fill the new oil filter with oil to about 2/3. It's ok if you go over that amount, it just means you might spill a bit when you screw it on.Carefully screw the new oil filter into place. Remember, it has oil in it so don't forget to hold it upright. It screws on clockwise.
You don't need a wrench to install the new oil filter. Screw it on as tight as you can get it with one hand. Overtightening the oil filter can strip its threads and cause a leak. Of course, not tightening it enough can cause a leak. So screw it on as tight as it will go with one hand, but no more.Now you're ready to fill the engine with oil. Unscrew the oil fill cap and insert your funnel. I like to buy the 5-quart containers of oil (cheaper) but if you're using single quarts that's fine, too.
Check your owner's manual to find out how much oil your engine holds. Pour a little more than 3/4 that amount into the engine. For example, if your car holds 4 quarts of oil, add 3 1/2.
If you're using a 5-quart container of oil, there is a guide on the side that shows how much oil you've put in.
You're not finished yet so don't drive off.
We didn't add all the oil because there may still be a little oil here and there we didn't account for.
Check your oil and add more until you're at the right level.
Be sure to put your oil cap back on! Oil spray can cause a fire.
As part of your vehicle registration you are issued a set of general-issue license plates. The plate number is assigned to you by the TxDMV, cannot be personalized.

The plates are good for seven years, and then you are required to obtain a new set of plates from your local county tax office. Mandatory replacement is necessary because at seven years the reflectivity of the license plate sheeting begins to diminish. 

When a new general-issue license plate design is released, it takes several years before all registered vehicle owners receive the plates. Those with previous general-issue plate designs that are less than seven years old keep that design until mandatory replacement becomes necessary.Sunroofs, by historical definition, are opaque. The first car company to offer a sunroof as a standard option was the Nash Motor Company as an option on some of its 1937 models.[1] Today, most factory sliding sunroof options feature a glass panel and are sometimes marketed as moonroofs, a term introduced in 1973 by John Atkinson, a marketing manager at Ford for the Lincoln Continental Mark IV. For the first year, Ford sent out its Mark IVs to American Sunroof Company for offline installation.

Variations of both the sunroof and moonroof have become the norm in both factory installed and aftermarket offerings, creating a wide range of features and choices.

Sunroof systems may be manual or electric, while most moonroof systems are electric/electronic. Manual sunroofs may be lever actuated, as in venting type pop-ups, manual lever or crank operated for sliding systems. Electric roof systems are usually cable driven by a motor and feature some form of sliding opening. Most moonroof systems today are electric and have either a combination pop-up/inbuilt or a pop-up/spoiler configuration (see Sunroof Types below).

Roof systems may be original equipment, factory options (provided by the car company), or installed aftermarket by a roof installation professional for the car dealer or retail customer. Once the vehicle leaves the assembly line, the factory option can no longer be integrated into the roof, making aftermarket the only option.

Open sunroofs have occasionally led to break-ins using small children or to practical jokes such as filling a car's interior with Styrofoam peanuts
In automobiles, a power steering (also known as power assisted steering (PAS) or steering assist system) helps drivers steer by augmenting steering effort of the steering wheel. Hydraulic or electric actuators add controlled energy to the steering mechanism, so the driver needs to provide only modest effort regardless of conditions. Power steering helps considerably when a vehicle is stopped or moving slowly. Also, power steering provides some feedback of forces acting on the front wheels to give an ongoing sense of how the wheels are interacting with the road; this is typically called "rοad feel".

Representative power steering systems for cars augment steering effort via an actuator, a hydraulic cylinder, which is part of a servo system. These systems have a direct mechanical connection between the steering wheel and the linkage that steers the wheels. This means that power-steering system failure (to augment effort) still permits the vehicle to be steered using manual effort alone.

Other power steering systems (such as those in the largest off-road construction vehicles) have no direct mechanical connection to the steering linkage; they require power. Systems of this kind, with no mechanical connection, are sometimes called "drive by wire" or "steer by wire", by analogy with aviation's "fly-by-wire". In this context, "wire" refers to electrical cables that carry power and data, not thin-wire-rope mechanical control cables.

In other power steering systems, electric motors provide the assistance instead of hydraulic systems. As with hydraulic types, power to the actuator (motor, in this case) is controlled by the rest of the power-steering system.

Some construction vehicles have a two-part frame with a rugged hinge in the middle; this hinge allows the front and rear axles to become non-parallel to steer the vehicle. Opposing hydraulic cylinders move the halves of the frame relative to each other to steer.
